code-notes/salishsea-nemo/quickstart/salish.rst, before:

.. _WorkingOnSalish:

*********************************
Working on ``salish`` : NEMO v3.6
*********************************

This section describes the steps to set up and run the NEMO version 3.6 code on our group's development machine,
``salish``.


Create a Workspace
==================

You can call your workspace directory whatever you want but for consistency across systems we're going to call it :file:`MEOPAR`.

``salish`` has a large local storage partition mounted at :file:`/data/` which is where we will put the code and run configuration file repos:

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir -p /data/$USER/MEOPAR

Create directories for the temporary directories that are created to run the model,
and to receive results files from runs.
We'll call them :file:`SalishSea/` and :file:`SalishSea/results/`:

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir -p /data/$USER/MEOPAR/SalishSea/results

The ``ocean`` storage storage server space that you use on your Waterhole workstation is mounted at :file:`/ocean/` on ``salish`` so you should be able to see your :ref:`SalishSeaReposPackages` at :file:`/ocean/$USER/MEOPAR/`.

You may want to open an EOAS help desk ticket requesting that the ``salish`` :file:`/data/` partition be mounted on your Waterhole workstation so that you can easily view and copy files when you are not logged into ``salish`` without having to use :command:`scp` or :command:`sftp`.


Clone the Repos
===============

Assuming that you are using SSH key authentication on GitHub
(see :ref:`moaddocs:CopyYourPublicSshKeyToGitHub`),
clone the following repositories into your :file:`/data/$USER/MEOPAR/`  workspace:

* :ref:`grid-repo`
* :ref:`rivers-repo`
* :ref:`tides-repo`
* :ref:`tracers-repo`
* :ref:`NEMO-3.6-code-repo`
* :ref:`XIOS-ARCH-repo`
* :ref:`XIOS-2-repo`
* :ref:`SS-run-sets-repo`
* :ref:`NEMO-Cmd-repo`
* :ref:`SalishSeaCmd-repo`

.. code-block:: bash

    cd /data/$USER/MEOPAR/
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/grid.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/rivers-climatology.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/tides.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/tracers.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/XIOS-ARCH.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/XIOS-2.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/SS-run-sets.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/NEMO-Cmd.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/SalishSeaCmd.git


.. _InstallCommandProcessorPackages:

Install the Command Processor Packages
======================================

This section assumes that you have already installed and configured :command:`conda` in your
ocean/waterhole working environment (:ref:`/media/doug/warehouse/MOAD/docs/conda_pkg_env_mgr.rst`).

Create a ``salishsea-cmd`` conda environment:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd /data/$USER/MEOPAR/
    conda env create -f SalishSeaCmd/envs/environment-hpc.yaml

Install the :ref:`NEMO-CommandProcessor` and :ref:`SalishSeaCmdProcessor` Python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    conda activate salishsea-cmd
    python -m pip install --user --editable NEMO-Cmd
    python -m pip install --user --editable SalishSeaCmd

The ``--user`` options in those commands cause the :command:`nemo` and :command:`salishsea`
command processors to be installed in your :file:`$HOME/.local/` directory tree in a way that allows them to be used without the need to activate the ``salishsea-cmd`` environment.
The ``--editable`` options install the packages in a way that they can be updated when new features are pushed to GitHub by simply doing a :command:`git pull`  in the package clone directories.

Confirm that the :ref:`SalishSeaCmdProcessor` works in your base environment
(i.e. without the ``salishsea-cmd`` environment activated):

.. code-block:: bash

    conda deactivate
    salishsea --help

You should see output like:

.. code-block:: text

    usage: salishsea [--version] [-v | -q] [--log-file LOG_FILE] [-h] [--debug]

    SalishSeaCast NEMO Command Processor

    options:
    --version             show program's version number and exit
    -v, --verbose         Increase verbosity of output. Can be repeated.
    -q, --quiet           Suppress output except warnings and errors.
    --log-file LOG_FILE
                            Specify a file to log output. Disabled by default.
    -h, --help            Show help message and exit.
    --debug               Show tracebacks on errors.

    Commands:
    combine  Combine per-processor files from an MPI NEMO run into single files (NEMO-Cmd)
    complete  print bash completion command (cliff)
    deflate  Deflate variables in netCDF files using Lempel-Ziv compression. (NEMO-Cmd)
    gather  Gather results from a NEMO run. (NEMO-Cmd)
    help  print detailed help for another command (cliff)
    prepare  Prepare a SalishSeaCast NEMO run.
    run  Prepare, execute, and gather results from a SalishSeaCast NEMO model run.
    split-results  Split the results of a multi-day SalishSeaCast NEMO model run (e.g. a hindcast run)


.. _CompileXIOS-salish:

Compile XIOS-2
==============

Please see the :ref:`moaddocs:XIOS-2-docs` section of the :ref:`UBC-EOAS-MOAD-docs`.


Compile NEMO-3.6
================

Compile the ``SalishSea`` NEMO configuration and link it to XIOS-2 using the ``salish`` architecture definitions,
distributing the compilation over 8 cores.
The NEMO ARCH files use the :envvar:`XIOS_HOME` environment variable to find the XIOS-2 library you built above.
:envvar:`XIOS_HOME` *must* be an absolute path to your XIOS-2 clone directory.
You can set :envvar:`XIOS_HOME` on the command-line before the :command:`makenemo` and :command:`maketools` commands as shown below,
or you can set and export the value of :envvar:`XIOS_HOME` in your :file:`$HOME/.bashrc` file.

.. code-block:: bash

    cd NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/CONFIG
    XIOS_HOME=/data/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2/ ./makenemo -n SalishSea -m GCC_SALISH -j8

The resulting executable is located in :file:`NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/CONFIG/SalishSea/BLD/bin/`.

Compile and link the :program:`rebuild_nemo` tool:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/TOOLS
    XIOS_HOME=/data/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2/ ./maketools -m GCC_SALISH -n REBUILD_NEMO

See :ref:`rebuild-nemo-tool` for more information about it.


.. _PrepareRun:

Prepare and Execute Runs
========================

The :file:`SS-run-sets` :ref:`SS-run-sets-SalishSea` contains a subdirectory called :file:`v201702/` that contains a version controlled sample run description file and namelist segment files.
Create your own directory in that repo where you can copy,
edit,
and version control those files to define the run that you want to execute.

The run description file is described in the :ref:`RunDescriptionFileStructure` section of the :ref:`project tools documentation <SalishSeaToolsDocs>`.
The namelists are described in the `NEMO-3.6 Book`_.

.. _NEMO-3.6 Book: https://zenodo.org/record/3248739

Use :program:`salishsea` :ref:`salishsea-run` to prepare,
execute,
and gather the results for a run:

.. code-block:: bash

    salishsea run SalishSea.yaml /data/$USER/MEOPAR/SalishSea/results/my_excellent_results

:command:`salishsea run` returns the path and name of the temporary run directory,
and the job identifier assigned by the queue manager,
something like:

.. code-block:: bash

    salishsea_cmd.prepare INFO: Created run directory ../../SalishSea/38e87e0c-472d-11e3-9c8e-0025909a8461
    salishsea_cmd.run INFO: 57.master

:command:`salishsea run` has a number of command-line option flags that are useful for controlling details of how runs are executed,
and for debugging your YAML files and the symlinks in the temporary run directory.
Please see :command:`salishsea help run` or the :ref:`SalishSeaCmd package docs <salishseacmd:salishsea-run>`.

You can use the :program:`qstat` command to monitor the execution status of your job.

A convenient command to monitor the memory use of a run and its time step progress is:

.. code-block:: bash

    watch -n 5 "(free -m; cat time.step)"

When the job completes the results should have been gathered in the directory you specified in the :command:`salishsea run` command and the temporary run directory should have been deleted.

You should receive and email something like::

  Date: Thu, 2 Feb 2017 15:51:05 -0800
  From: <adm@salish.eos.ubc.ca>
  To: <dlatornell@eoas.ubc.ca>
  Subject: PBS JOB 3926.master

  PBS Job Id: 3926.master
  Job Name:   test-cmd
  Exec host:  master/0
  Begun execution

when your run starts execution
(usually immediately).

When the run finishes you should receive an email something like::

  Date: Thu, 2 Feb 2017 15:53:46 -0800
  From: <adm@salish.eos.ubc.ca>
  To: <dlatornell@eoas.ubc.ca>
  Subject: PBS JOB 3926.master

  PBS Job Id: 3926.master
  Job Name:   test-cmd
  Exec host:  master/0
  Execution terminated
  Exit_status=0
  resources_used.cput=00:13:54
  resources_used.mem=21567708kb
  resources_used.vmem=24704876kb
  resources_used.walltime=00:02:41

You may also receive a email when the run finishes that talks about::

  Unable to copy file /var/spool/torque/spool/...

Please see the :ref:`GettingStdoutAndStderrIntoYourResultsDirectory` section for instructions on how to resolve that issue.


Look at the Results
===================

A number of notebooks that look at NetCDF files are available in :file:`tools/analysis_tools/`.
To start these,
go to the top level directory of the :file:`analysis` repo on your local machine
(not on ``salish``) and type:

.. code-block:: bash

    jupyter notebook

At this point lots of information will appear in your terminal.
This terminal session is now running a server and cannot be used for anything else until you are finished with the notebooks.
At that point you need to CTRL-C to get out.

At the same time a window should open in your browser.
If it doesn't,
look at your terminal,
find the ip address, something like:

.. code-block:: bash

    The Jupyter Notebook is running at: http://127.0.0.1:8888/

and put that UTL into your browser.
From this initial window you can open the notebooks in :file:`analysis_tools` directory and look around.
The links to the various files will probably not work.
Change them to point to your file space.
You will probably want to build your own notebook but these notebooks give you lots of examples to copy from.


Profiling with the GNU Profiler
===============================

The GNU profiler allows you to find out which parts of the code are taking the longest to run.

1. Compile the code with the -pg flag.

This requires adding -pg to the two lines in your arch file that start with %FCFLAGS and %LDFLAGS (as in the following excerpt from :file:`NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/ARCH/UBC_EOAS/arch-GCC_SALISH_ocean_gprof.fcm`):

.. code-block:: bash

    %XIOS_HOME           /ocean/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2

    %NCDF_INC            -I/usr/include
    %NCDF_LIB            -L/usr/lib -lnetcdff -lnetcdf

    %XIOS_INC            -I%XIOS_HOME/inc
    %XIOS_LIB            -L%XIOS_HOME/lib -lxios -lstdc++

    %CPP	             cpp
    %FC                  mpif90
    %FCFLAGS             -cpp -O3 -fdefault-real-8 -funroll-all-loops -fcray-pointer -ffree-line-length-none -pg
    %FFLAGS              %FCFLAGS
    %LD                  mpif90
    %LDFLAGS             -lstdc++ -pg
    %FPPFLAGS            -P -C -traditional
    %AR                  ar
    %ARFLAGS             -rs
    %MK                  make
    %USER_INC            %XIOS_INC %NCDF_INC
    %USER_LIB            %XIOS_LIB %NCDF_LIB

Using the modified arch file, compile your NEMO configuration, e.g.:

.. code-block:: bash

    XIOS_HOME=/data/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2/ ./makenemo -n SalishSea -m GCC_SALISH_ocean_gprof


2. Submit the model run from your prepared run directory with the :command:`no-submit` option

.. code-block:: bash

    salishsea run --no-submit example.yaml /path/to/results

and then, from the temporary run directory, run

.. code-block:: bash

    mpirun -n 7 ./nemo.exe : -n 1 ./xios_server.exe > stdout 2>stderr &

A file called gmon.out will be created in your run directory.


3. In the temporary run directory, sse the :program:`gprof` command with the executable name and
gmon.out as input to create a readable summary of the timing output.
Redirect the output to a text file to save it; you can then view this file using :program:`less`.

.. code-block:: bash

    gprof nemo.exe gmon.out > gprof_out.txt
    less gprof_out.txt

For more information, see https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/gprof/Call-Graph.html#Call-Graph


.. _GettingStdoutAndStderrIntoYourResultsDirectory:

Getting :file:`stdout` and :file:`stderr` into Your Results Directory
=====================================================================

If you receive email messages like::

  Date: Thu, 2 Feb 2017 15:53:55 -0800
  From: <adm@salish.eos.ubc.ca>
  To: <dlatornell@eoas.ubc.ca>
  Subject: PBS JOB 3926.master

  PBS Job Id: 3926.master
  Job Name:   test-cmd
  Exec host:  master/0
  An error has occurred processing your job, see below.
  Post job file processing error; job 3926.master on host master/0

  Unable to copy file /var/spool/torque/spool/3926.master.OU to dlatorne@salish.eos.ubc.ca:/data/dlatorne/MEOPAR/test-cmd/test-fspath2/stdout
  *** error from copy
  Permission denied (publickey,password).
  lost connection
  *** end error output
  Output retained on that host in: /var/spool/torque/undelivered/3926.master.OU

  Unable to copy file /var/spool/torque/spool/3926.master.ER to dlatorne@salish.eos.ubc.ca:/data/dlatorne/MEOPAR/test-cmd/test-fspath2/stderr
  *** error from copy
  Permission denied (publickey,password).
  lost connection
  *** end error output
  Output retained on that host in: /var/spool/torque/undelivered/3926.master.ER

when your runs on salish finish,
the system is telling you that it can't copy the :file:`master.OU` (:file:`stdout`) and :file:`master.ER` (:file:`stderr`) files from your run to your results directory.
You can manually retrieve them from the paths given in the email.

To resolve the copy error and get the files to be renames to :file:`stdout` and :file:`stderr` in your results directory you need to set up an ssh key pair *without a passphrase*,
configure :command:`ssh` to be able to use them,
and make the key pair trusted on ``salish``.
The steps to do that are:

#. Create a passphrase-less ssh key pair:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cd $HOME/.ssh
       ssh-keygen -C"salish-torque" -f $HOME/.ssh/salish_torque_id_rsa

   Just hit :kbd:`Enter` twice when you are prompted to enter and confirm a passphrase::

     Generating public/private rsa key pair.
     Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase):
     Enter same passphrase again:

#. Configure :command:`ssh` to use the key pair with the user and hostname that the system uses to copy files from the :program:`torque` spool to your results directory by adding a block like the following to your :file:`$HOME/.ssh/config` file::

    Host salish.eos.ubc.ca
         Hostname salish.eos.ubc.ca
         User dlatorne
         IdentityFile ~/.ssh/salish_torque_id_rsa

   replacing ``dlatorne`` with your user id.

#. Make the key pair trusted on ``salish`` by appending the public key to your :file:`$HOME/.ssh/authorized_keys` file:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cat $HOME/.ssh/salish_torque_id_rsa.pub >> $HOME/.ssh/authorized_keys

Commit message:

Update NEMO-3.6 build section for salish
Change to use SalishSeaCast_Blue NEMO configuration.

code-notes/salishsea-nemo/quickstart/salish.rst, after:

.. _WorkingOnSalish:

*********************************
Working on ``salish`` : NEMO v3.6
*********************************

This section describes the steps to set up and run the NEMO version 3.6 code on our group's development machine,
``salish``.


Create a Workspace
==================

You can call your workspace directory whatever you want but for consistency across systems we're going to call it :file:`MEOPAR`.

``salish`` has a large local storage partition mounted at :file:`/data/` which is where we will put the code and run configuration file repos:

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir -p /data/$USER/MEOPAR

Create directories for the temporary directories that are created to run the model,
and to receive results files from runs.
We'll call them :file:`SalishSea/` and :file:`SalishSea/results/`:

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir -p /data/$USER/MEOPAR/SalishSea/results

The ``ocean`` storage storage server space that you use on your Waterhole workstation is mounted at :file:`/ocean/` on ``salish`` so you should be able to see your :ref:`SalishSeaReposPackages` at :file:`/ocean/$USER/MEOPAR/`.

You may want to open an EOAS help desk ticket requesting that the ``salish`` :file:`/data/` partition be mounted on your Waterhole workstation so that you can easily view and copy files when you are not logged into ``salish`` without having to use :command:`scp` or :command:`sftp`.


Clone the Repos
===============

Assuming that you are using SSH key authentication on GitHub
(see :ref:`moaddocs:CopyYourPublicSshKeyToGitHub`),
clone the following repositories into your :file:`/data/$USER/MEOPAR/`  workspace:

* :ref:`grid-repo`
* :ref:`rivers-repo`
* :ref:`tides-repo`
* :ref:`tracers-repo`
* :ref:`NEMO-3.6-code-repo`
* :ref:`XIOS-ARCH-repo`
* :ref:`XIOS-2-repo`
* :ref:`SS-run-sets-repo`
* :ref:`NEMO-Cmd-repo`
* :ref:`SalishSeaCmd-repo`

.. code-block:: bash

    cd /data/$USER/MEOPAR/
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/grid.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/rivers-climatology.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/tides.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/tracers.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/XIOS-ARCH.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/XIOS-2.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/SS-run-sets.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/NEMO-Cmd.git
    git clone git@github.com:SalishSeaCast/SalishSeaCmd.git


.. _InstallCommandProcessorPackages:

Install the Command Processor Packages
======================================

This section assumes that you have already installed and configured :command:`conda` in your
ocean/waterhole working environment (:ref:`/media/doug/warehouse/MOAD/docs/conda_pkg_env_mgr.rst`).

Create a ``salishsea-cmd`` conda environment:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd /data/$USER/MEOPAR/
    conda env create -f SalishSeaCmd/envs/environment-hpc.yaml

Install the :ref:`NEMO-CommandProcessor` and :ref:`SalishSeaCmdProcessor` Python packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    conda activate salishsea-cmd
    python -m pip install --user --editable NEMO-Cmd
    python -m pip install --user --editable SalishSeaCmd

The ``--user`` options in those commands cause the :command:`nemo` and :command:`salishsea`
command processors to be installed in your :file:`$HOME/.local/` directory tree in a way that allows them to be used without the need to activate the ``salishsea-cmd`` environment.
The ``--editable`` options install the packages in a way that they can be updated when new features are pushed to GitHub by simply doing a :command:`git pull`  in the package clone directories.

Confirm that the :ref:`SalishSeaCmdProcessor` works in your base environment
(i.e. without the ``salishsea-cmd`` environment activated):

.. code-block:: bash

    conda deactivate
    salishsea --help

You should see output like:

.. code-block:: text

    usage: salishsea [--version] [-v | -q] [--log-file LOG_FILE] [-h] [--debug]

    SalishSeaCast NEMO Command Processor

    options:
    --version             show program's version number and exit
    -v, --verbose         Increase verbosity of output. Can be repeated.
    -q, --quiet           Suppress output except warnings and errors.
    --log-file LOG_FILE
                            Specify a file to log output. Disabled by default.
    -h, --help            Show help message and exit.
    --debug               Show tracebacks on errors.

    Commands:
    combine  Combine per-processor files from an MPI NEMO run into single files (NEMO-Cmd)
    complete  print bash completion command (cliff)
    deflate  Deflate variables in netCDF files using Lempel-Ziv compression. (NEMO-Cmd)
    gather  Gather results from a NEMO run. (NEMO-Cmd)
    help  print detailed help for another command (cliff)
    prepare  Prepare a SalishSeaCast NEMO run.
    run  Prepare, execute, and gather results from a SalishSeaCast NEMO model run.
    split-results  Split the results of a multi-day SalishSeaCast NEMO model run (e.g. a hindcast run)


.. _CompileXIOS-salish:

Compile XIOS-2
==============

Please see the :ref:`moaddocs:XIOS-2-docs` section of the :ref:`UBC-EOAS-MOAD-docs`.


Compile NEMO-3.6
================

Compile the ``SalishSeaCast_Blue`` NEMO configuration and link it to XIOS-2 using the ``salish``
architecture definitions,
distributing the compilation over 8 cores.
The NEMO ARCH files use the :envvar:`XIOS_HOME` environment variable to find the XIOS-2 library you
built above.
:envvar:`XIOS_HOME` *must* be an absolute path to your XIOS-2 clone directory.
You can set :envvar:`XIOS_HOME` on the command-line before the :command:`makenemo` and
:command:`maketools` commands as shown below,
or you can set and export the value of :envvar:`XIOS_HOME` in your :file:`$HOME/.bashrc` file.

.. code-block:: bash

    cd NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/CONFIG
    XIOS_HOME=/data/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2/ ./makenemo -n SalishSeaCast_Blue -m GCC_SALISH -j8

The resulting executable is located in
:file:`NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/CONFIG/SalishSeaCast_Blue/BLD/bin/`.

Compile and link the :program:`rebuild_nemo` tool:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/TOOLS
    XIOS_HOME=/data/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2/ ./maketools -m GCC_SALISH -n REBUILD_NEMO

See :ref:`rebuild-nemo-tool` for more information about it.


.. _PrepareRun:

Prepare and Execute Runs
========================

The :file:`SS-run-sets` :ref:`SS-run-sets-SalishSea` contains a subdirectory called :file:`v201702/` that contains a version controlled sample run description file and namelist segment files.
Create your own directory in that repo where you can copy,
edit,
and version control those files to define the run that you want to execute.

The run description file is described in the :ref:`RunDescriptionFileStructure` section of the :ref:`project tools documentation <SalishSeaToolsDocs>`.
The namelists are described in the `NEMO-3.6 Book`_.

.. _NEMO-3.6 Book: https://zenodo.org/record/3248739

Use :program:`salishsea` :ref:`salishsea-run` to prepare,
execute,
and gather the results for a run:

.. code-block:: bash

    salishsea run SalishSea.yaml /data/$USER/MEOPAR/SalishSea/results/my_excellent_results

:command:`salishsea run` returns the path and name of the temporary run directory,
and the job identifier assigned by the queue manager,
something like:

.. code-block:: bash

    salishsea_cmd.prepare INFO: Created run directory ../../SalishSea/38e87e0c-472d-11e3-9c8e-0025909a8461
    salishsea_cmd.run INFO: 57.master

:command:`salishsea run` has a number of command-line option flags that are useful for controlling details of how runs are executed,
and for debugging your YAML files and the symlinks in the temporary run directory.
Please see :command:`salishsea help run` or the :ref:`SalishSeaCmd package docs <salishseacmd:salishsea-run>`.

You can use the :program:`qstat` command to monitor the execution status of your job.

A convenient command to monitor the memory use of a run and its time step progress is:

.. code-block:: bash

    watch -n 5 "(free -m; cat time.step)"

When the job completes the results should have been gathered in the directory you specified in the :command:`salishsea run` command and the temporary run directory should have been deleted.

You should receive and email something like::

  Date: Thu, 2 Feb 2017 15:51:05 -0800
  From: <adm@salish.eos.ubc.ca>
  To: <dlatornell@eoas.ubc.ca>
  Subject: PBS JOB 3926.master

  PBS Job Id: 3926.master
  Job Name:   test-cmd
  Exec host:  master/0
  Begun execution

when your run starts execution
(usually immediately).

When the run finishes you should receive an email something like::

  Date: Thu, 2 Feb 2017 15:53:46 -0800
  From: <adm@salish.eos.ubc.ca>
  To: <dlatornell@eoas.ubc.ca>
  Subject: PBS JOB 3926.master

  PBS Job Id: 3926.master
  Job Name:   test-cmd
  Exec host:  master/0
  Execution terminated
  Exit_status=0
  resources_used.cput=00:13:54
  resources_used.mem=21567708kb
  resources_used.vmem=24704876kb
  resources_used.walltime=00:02:41

You may also receive a email when the run finishes that talks about::

  Unable to copy file /var/spool/torque/spool/...

Please see the :ref:`GettingStdoutAndStderrIntoYourResultsDirectory` section for instructions on how to resolve that issue.


Look at the Results
===================

A number of notebooks that look at NetCDF files are available in :file:`tools/analysis_tools/`.
To start these,
go to the top level directory of the :file:`analysis` repo on your local machine
(not on ``salish``) and type:

.. code-block:: bash

    jupyter notebook

At this point lots of information will appear in your terminal.
This terminal session is now running a server and cannot be used for anything else until you are finished with the notebooks.
At that point you need to CTRL-C to get out.

At the same time a window should open in your browser.
If it doesn't,
look at your terminal,
find the ip address, something like:

.. code-block:: bash

    The Jupyter Notebook is running at: http://127.0.0.1:8888/

and put that UTL into your browser.
From this initial window you can open the notebooks in :file:`analysis_tools` directory and look around.
The links to the various files will probably not work.
Change them to point to your file space.
You will probably want to build your own notebook but these notebooks give you lots of examples to copy from.


Profiling with the GNU Profiler
===============================

The GNU profiler allows you to find out which parts of the code are taking the longest to run.

1. Compile the code with the -pg flag.

This requires adding -pg to the two lines in your arch file that start with %FCFLAGS and %LDFLAGS (as in the following excerpt from :file:`NEMO-3.6-code/NEMOGCM/ARCH/UBC_EOAS/arch-GCC_SALISH_ocean_gprof.fcm`):

.. code-block:: bash

    %XIOS_HOME           /ocean/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2

    %NCDF_INC            -I/usr/include
    %NCDF_LIB            -L/usr/lib -lnetcdff -lnetcdf

    %XIOS_INC            -I%XIOS_HOME/inc
    %XIOS_LIB            -L%XIOS_HOME/lib -lxios -lstdc++

    %CPP	             cpp
    %FC                  mpif90
    %FCFLAGS             -cpp -O3 -fdefault-real-8 -funroll-all-loops -fcray-pointer -ffree-line-length-none -pg
    %FFLAGS              %FCFLAGS
    %LD                  mpif90
    %LDFLAGS             -lstdc++ -pg
    %FPPFLAGS            -P -C -traditional
    %AR                  ar
    %ARFLAGS             -rs
    %MK                  make
    %USER_INC            %XIOS_INC %NCDF_INC
    %USER_LIB            %XIOS_LIB %NCDF_LIB

Using the modified arch file, compile your NEMO configuration, e.g.:

.. code-block:: bash

    XIOS_HOME=/data/$USER/MEOPAR/XIOS-2/ ./makenemo -n SalishSea -m GCC_SALISH_ocean_gprof


2. Submit the model run from your prepared run directory with the :command:`no-submit` option

.. code-block:: bash

    salishsea run --no-submit example.yaml /path/to/results

and then, from the temporary run directory, run

.. code-block:: bash

    mpirun -n 7 ./nemo.exe : -n 1 ./xios_server.exe > stdout 2>stderr &

A file called gmon.out will be created in your run directory.


3. In the temporary run directory, sse the :program:`gprof` command with the executable name and
gmon.out as input to create a readable summary of the timing output.
Redirect the output to a text file to save it; you can then view this file using :program:`less`.

.. code-block:: bash

    gprof nemo.exe gmon.out > gprof_out.txt
    less gprof_out.txt

For more information, see https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/gprof/Call-Graph.html#Call-Graph


.. _GettingStdoutAndStderrIntoYourResultsDirectory:

Getting :file:`stdout` and :file:`stderr` into Your Results Directory
=====================================================================

If you receive email messages like::

  Date: Thu, 2 Feb 2017 15:53:55 -0800
  From: <adm@salish.eos.ubc.ca>
  To: <dlatornell@eoas.ubc.ca>
  Subject: PBS JOB 3926.master

  PBS Job Id: 3926.master
  Job Name:   test-cmd
  Exec host:  master/0
  An error has occurred processing your job, see below.
  Post job file processing error; job 3926.master on host master/0

  Unable to copy file /var/spool/torque/spool/3926.master.OU to dlatorne@salish.eos.ubc.ca:/data/dlatorne/MEOPAR/test-cmd/test-fspath2/stdout
  *** error from copy
  Permission denied (publickey,password).
  lost connection
  *** end error output
  Output retained on that host in: /var/spool/torque/undelivered/3926.master.OU

  Unable to copy file /var/spool/torque/spool/3926.master.ER to dlatorne@salish.eos.ubc.ca:/data/dlatorne/MEOPAR/test-cmd/test-fspath2/stderr
  *** error from copy
  Permission denied (publickey,password).
  lost connection
  *** end error output
  Output retained on that host in: /var/spool/torque/undelivered/3926.master.ER

when your runs on salish finish,
the system is telling you that it can't copy the :file:`master.OU` (:file:`stdout`) and :file:`master.ER` (:file:`stderr`) files from your run to your results directory.
You can manually retrieve them from the paths given in the email.

To resolve the copy error and get the files to be renames to :file:`stdout` and :file:`stderr` in your results directory you need to set up an ssh key pair *without a passphrase*,
configure :command:`ssh` to be able to use them,
and make the key pair trusted on ``salish``.
The steps to do that are:

#. Create a passphrase-less ssh key pair:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cd $HOME/.ssh
       ssh-keygen -C"salish-torque" -f $HOME/.ssh/salish_torque_id_rsa

   Just hit :kbd:`Enter` twice when you are prompted to enter and confirm a passphrase::

     Generating public/private rsa key pair.
     Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase):
     Enter same passphrase again:

#. Configure :command:`ssh` to use the key pair with the user and hostname that the system uses to copy files from the :program:`torque` spool to your results directory by adding a block like the following to your :file:`$HOME/.ssh/config` file::

    Host salish.eos.ubc.ca
         Hostname salish.eos.ubc.ca
         User dlatorne
         IdentityFile ~/.ssh/salish_torque_id_rsa

   replacing ``dlatorne`` with your user id.

#. Make the key pair trusted on ``salish`` by appending the public key to your :file:`$HOME/.ssh/authorized_keys` file:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cat $HOME/.ssh/salish_torque_id_rsa.pub >> $HOME/.ssh/authorized_keys
