code-notes/salishsea-nemo/repos-maint/nemo-3.6.rst, before:

.. _NEMO-3.6CodeRepoMaintenance:

******************************
NEMO-3.6 Code Repo Maintenance
******************************

.. _NEMO-3.6MaintSetup:

Set-up
======

The :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repository is an :command:`svn` checkout of ``http://forge.ipsl.fr/nemo/svn/branches/2015/nemo_v3_6_STABLE`` and also a read-only Mercurial repository.
It was initialized with:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cd /ocean/sallen/hg_repos
    $ svn co -r 5072 http://forge.ipsl.jussieu.fr/nemo/svn/branches/2015/nemo_v3_6_STABLE NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror
    $ hg init NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror
    $ cd NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror
    $ cat > .hgignore
    syntax: glob
    .svn
    ctrl-d
    $ hg add
    $ hg ci -m"Initialize NEMO-3.6 svn mirror at r5072 of ^/trunk."

:command:`svn` v1.8.8 was used on :kbd:`skookum` for the :command:`svn` part of the initialization.

Doug maintains an :file:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge` repo on his laptop.
That repo is used to merge changes from the upstream Subversion repository that are brought in via the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo,
and from the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket.
The :file:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge` repo was created by cloning the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo:

.. _Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code

.. code-block:: bash

    hg clone ssh://skookum.eos.ubc.ca//ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-code-hg-mirror NEMO-3.6-code-mirror-merge

and setting the paths in its :file:`.hg/hgrc` to:

.. code-block:: ini

    [paths]
    bb = ssh://hg@bitbucket.org/salishsea/nemo-3.6-code
    default-push = ssh://hg@bitbucket.org/salishsea/nemo-3.6-code
    mirror = ssh://skookum.eos.ubc.ca//ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-code-hg-mirror

Those paths mean that the repo for :command:`hg pull` and :command:`hg incoming` commands must be specified explicitly.
The :kbd:`bb` and :kbd:`mirror` paths are provided to facilitate pulling from :kbd:`nemo-3.6-code` on Bitbucket and :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-code-hg-mirror`,
respectively.
:command:`hg push` and :command:`hg outgoing` commands will act on the :kbd:`nemo-3.6-code` repo on Bitbucket,
unless otherwise specified.

The `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket was created via the Bitbucket web interface and populated there by an :command:`hg push` from Doug's :file:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge` repo.

A working copy was then created by cloning the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket as :file:`NEMO-3.6-code`.
The workflow sections below explain how these 4 repo clones are used to pull changes from upstream and merge them with changes that Salish Sea team members push to Bitbucket.


.. figure:: NEMO-3.6CodeRepoMaint.svg

   NEMO-3.6 code repositories and workflow to update and merge SVN and local changes


.. _PullChangesFromNEMO-3.6svn:

Workflow to Pull Changes from NEMO-3.6 :command:`svn` Repo
==========================================================

The workflow to pull changes from the master NEMO :command:`svn` repo and commit them to our :file:`NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo is somewhat automated by the :ref:`Marlin`.

#. Review the upstream changes in the source browser at ``http://forge.ipsl.jussieu.fr/nemo/svn/branches/2015/nemo_v3_6_STABLE`` to select a range of changes to be pulled into our :file:`NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo.

   .. note::

      Pay special attention to changes in the :file:`OPA_SRC/` and :file:`TOP_SRC/` trees that involve files that have been copied into :file:`NEMOGCM/CONFIG/SalishSea/MY_SRC/` or team members' :file:`MY_SRC/` directories.
      Those files must be *manually* merged with their :file:`MY_SRC/` counterparts.

#. Working on :kbd:`salish` in the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo with an activated virtualenv in which :command:`marlin` is installed:

   .. code-block:: bash

       $ ssh salish
       $ workon marlin
       (marlin)$ cd /ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror

#. Use :kbd:`marlin incoming` information about the next SVN revision that will be pulled from upstream and confirm that it is the expected revision:

   .. code-block:: bash

       (marlin)$ marlin incoming
       r6482 2016-04-19 09:59:19 UTC
         #1687 - Add a consistency check for the setting of ln_useCT and nn_eos

   The :kbd:`--limit` option can be used to see more incoming revisions;
   see :command:`marlin help incoming` for details.

#. Use :kbd:`marlin update` to update the working copy to the next upstream commit and commit the SVN update as a Mercurial changeset with the SVN commit message as the body of the Mercurial commit message and echo that message:

   .. code-block:: bash

       (marlin)$ marlin update
       Update to svn r6482.

       #1687 - Add a consistency check for the setting of ln_useCT and nn_eos


   The :kbd:`--to-rev` option can be used to apply a series of upstream updates,
   committing them to Mercurial one at a time;
   see :command:`marlin help update` for details.


Workflow to Merge NEMO-3.6 :command:`svn` Repo and Salish Sea Revisions
=======================================================================

Merging changes from NEMO :command:`svn` and the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket is done in a repo that is used for only that purpose.
Doug does the merges on his laptop.
The repo in which the merging is done was created by cloning the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo as described in the :ref:`NEMO-3.6MaintSetup` section.

After the :ref:`PullChangesFromNEMO-3.6svn` has been completed the workflow to merge those changes with Salish Sea MEOPAR project revisions is:

#. Pull and update recent changes from the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ into :kbd:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge`:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cd NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge
       hg pull --update bb

#. Pull and update the changes from :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` into :kbd:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge`:

   .. code-block:: bash

       hg pull mirror

#. Because the changesets pulled from the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ are public a branch merge is necessary:

   .. code-block:: bash

       hg merge
       hg commit -m"Merge svn updates."

#. Manually merge and commit changes that involve files that have been copied into :file:`NEMOGCM/CONFIG/SalishSea/MY_SRC/` or team members' :file:`MY_SRC/` directories.
   Those files are most likely to be in :file:`OPA_SRC/` and :file:`TOP_SRC/`.

#. Push the result of the updates and merges to the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_:

   .. code-block:: bash

       hg push bb

   If other users have pushed changes to the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ while merge conflicts were being handled :command:`hg pull --rebase` can be used to bring in those changes and deal with any additional merge conflicts.

#. Notify team members of the upstream merge,
   especially if manual merges of :file:`MY_SRC/` files were required,
   so that they can manage merging changes into any untracked :file:`MY_SRC/` files they may have.


Local commits
=============

We are maintaining several local commits to files that do not fit in :file:`MY_SRC/` directories. They are:

#. Import changeset 7751 from upstream NEMO: `900e1ce4066f2a64223b502167a9a15a6d7c7b2d`_
#. Make :file:`rebuild_nemo` write compressed netCDF4 restart files: `28e2d9cd2a82b88e475a16804837eee22ea342f2`_
#. Sort cfg.txt in :file:`makenemo`, `9f0335b59c780d055b7466e5ffd641d4ab0234aa`_
#. Escape 'ls' in :file:`Fmake_WORK.sh`, `4979fc15317c1c899697c1b89d5a64d688917253`_

.. _900e1ce4066f2a64223b502167a9a15a6d7c7b2d: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/900e1ce4066f2a64223b502167a9a15a6d7c7b2d
.. _28e2d9cd2a82b88e475a16804837eee22ea342f2: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/28e2d9cd2a82b88e475a16804837eee22ea342f2
.. _9f0335b59c780d055b7466e5ffd641d4ab0234aa: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/9f0335b59c780d055b7466e5ffd641d4ab0234aa
.. _4979fc15317c1c899697c1b89d5a64d688917253: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/4979fc15317c1c899697c1b89d5a64d688917253

Some of these are fixed in NEMO upstream:

#. Escape 'ls' in :file:`Fmake_WORK.sh`,
``https://forge.ipsl.fr/nemo/ticket/1895``,
``https://forge.ipsl.fr/nemo/changeset/8527``

Commit message:

Fix broken and redirected links found by Sphinx linkcheck (#75)
* Remove Mercurial mode from emacs configuration

The `mercurial.el` file that was linked to seems to have disappeared
from the web. We no longer use Mercurial, and few people in the
group use emacs.

* Update broken & redirected links in documentation

* Update NEMO-3.6 repo maintenance docs

Docs are deprecated due to NEMO's transition from SVN to Git and
and ours from Bitbucket and Mercurial to Git and GitHub.

* Update XIOS-2 repo maintenance docs

Docs are deprecated due to our transition from Bitbucket and Mercurial
to Git and GitHub.

* Add www.alliancecan.ca to GHA linkcheck ignore list

Like alliancecan.ca, it times out due to rate limiting.

* Add www.emacswiki.org to GHA linkcheck ignore list

Requests from GitHub Actions runners fail with "Max retries exceeded".

code-notes/salishsea-nemo/repos-maint/nemo-3.6.rst, after:

.. _NEMO-3.6CodeRepoMaintenance:

******************************
NEMO-3.6 Code Repo Maintenance
******************************

.. warning::

   This section is completely out of date because NEMO now uses Git for version control rather than SVN,
   and we now use Git and GitHub for our Salish Sea NEMO code repository rather than Mercurial and Bitbucket.

   This section is retained to provide guidance for development of a future maintenance workflow
   when we move to a newer version of NEMO.


.. _NEMO-3.6MaintSetup:

Set-up
======

The :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repository is an :command:`svn` checkout of ``http://forge.ipsl.fr/nemo/svn/branches/2015/nemo_v3_6_STABLE`` and also a read-only Mercurial repository.
It was initialized with:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cd /ocean/sallen/hg_repos
    $ svn co -r 5072 http://forge.ipsl.jussieu.fr/nemo/svn/branches/2015/nemo_v3_6_STABLE NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror
    $ hg init NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror
    $ cd NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror
    $ cat > .hgignore
    syntax: glob
    .svn
    ctrl-d
    $ hg add
    $ hg ci -m"Initialize NEMO-3.6 svn mirror at r5072 of ^/trunk."

:command:`svn` v1.8.8 was used on :kbd:`skookum` for the :command:`svn` part of the initialization.

Doug maintains an :file:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge` repo on his laptop.
That repo is used to merge changes from the upstream Subversion repository that are brought in via the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo,
and from the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket.
The :file:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge` repo was created by cloning the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo:

.. _Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code

.. code-block:: bash

    hg clone ssh://skookum.eos.ubc.ca//ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-code-hg-mirror NEMO-3.6-code-mirror-merge

and setting the paths in its :file:`.hg/hgrc` to:

.. code-block:: ini

    [paths]
    bb = ssh://hg@bitbucket.org/salishsea/nemo-3.6-code
    default-push = ssh://hg@bitbucket.org/salishsea/nemo-3.6-code
    mirror = ssh://skookum.eos.ubc.ca//ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-code-hg-mirror

Those paths mean that the repo for :command:`hg pull` and :command:`hg incoming` commands must be specified explicitly.
The :kbd:`bb` and :kbd:`mirror` paths are provided to facilitate pulling from :kbd:`nemo-3.6-code` on Bitbucket and :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-code-hg-mirror`,
respectively.
:command:`hg push` and :command:`hg outgoing` commands will act on the :kbd:`nemo-3.6-code` repo on Bitbucket,
unless otherwise specified.

The `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket was created via the Bitbucket web interface and populated there by an :command:`hg push` from Doug's :file:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge` repo.

A working copy was then created by cloning the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket as :file:`NEMO-3.6-code`.
The workflow sections below explain how these 4 repo clones are used to pull changes from upstream and merge them with changes that Salish Sea team members push to Bitbucket.


.. figure:: NEMO-3.6CodeRepoMaint.svg

   NEMO-3.6 code repositories and workflow to update and merge SVN and local changes


.. _PullChangesFromNEMO-3.6svn:

Workflow to Pull Changes from NEMO-3.6 :command:`svn` Repo
==========================================================

The workflow to pull changes from the master NEMO :command:`svn` repo and commit them to our :file:`NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo was somewhat automated by the
(now deprecated)
``Marlin`` tool that we developed.

#. Review the upstream changes in the source browser at ``http://forge.ipsl.jussieu.fr/nemo/svn/branches/2015/nemo_v3_6_STABLE`` to select a range of changes to be pulled into our :file:`NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo.

   .. note::

      Pay special attention to changes in the :file:`OPA_SRC/` and :file:`TOP_SRC/` trees that involve files that have been copied into :file:`NEMOGCM/CONFIG/SalishSea/MY_SRC/` or team members' :file:`MY_SRC/` directories.
      Those files must be *manually* merged with their :file:`MY_SRC/` counterparts.

#. Working on :kbd:`salish` in the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo with an activated virtualenv in which :command:`marlin` is installed:

   .. code-block:: bash

       $ ssh salish
       $ workon marlin
       (marlin)$ cd /ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror

#. Use :kbd:`marlin incoming` information about the next SVN revision that will be pulled from upstream and confirm that it is the expected revision:

   .. code-block:: bash

       (marlin)$ marlin incoming
       r6482 2016-04-19 09:59:19 UTC
         #1687 - Add a consistency check for the setting of ln_useCT and nn_eos

   The :kbd:`--limit` option can be used to see more incoming revisions;
   see :command:`marlin help incoming` for details.

#. Use :kbd:`marlin update` to update the working copy to the next upstream commit and commit the SVN update as a Mercurial changeset with the SVN commit message as the body of the Mercurial commit message and echo that message:

   .. code-block:: bash

       (marlin)$ marlin update
       Update to svn r6482.

       #1687 - Add a consistency check for the setting of ln_useCT and nn_eos


   The :kbd:`--to-rev` option can be used to apply a series of upstream updates,
   committing them to Mercurial one at a time;
   see :command:`marlin help update` for details.


Workflow to Merge NEMO-3.6 :command:`svn` Repo and Salish Sea Revisions
=======================================================================

Merging changes from NEMO :command:`svn` and the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ on Bitbucket is done in a repo that is used for only that purpose.
Doug does the merges on his laptop.
The repo in which the merging is done was created by cloning the :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` repo as described in the :ref:`NEMO-3.6MaintSetup` section.

After the :ref:`PullChangesFromNEMO-3.6svn` has been completed the workflow to merge those changes with Salish Sea MEOPAR project revisions is:

#. Pull and update recent changes from the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ into :kbd:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge`:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cd NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge
       hg pull --update bb

#. Pull and update the changes from :file:`/ocean/sallen/hg_repos/NEMO-3.6-hg-mirror` into :kbd:`NEMO-3.6-mirror-merge`:

   .. code-block:: bash

       hg pull mirror

#. Because the changesets pulled from the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ are public a branch merge is necessary:

   .. code-block:: bash

       hg merge
       hg commit -m"Merge svn updates."

#. Manually merge and commit changes that involve files that have been copied into :file:`NEMOGCM/CONFIG/SalishSea/MY_SRC/` or team members' :file:`MY_SRC/` directories.
   Those files are most likely to be in :file:`OPA_SRC/` and :file:`TOP_SRC/`.

#. Push the result of the updates and merges to the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_:

   .. code-block:: bash

       hg push bb

   If other users have pushed changes to the `Salish Sea team NEMO-3.6-code repo`_ while merge conflicts were being handled :command:`hg pull --rebase` can be used to bring in those changes and deal with any additional merge conflicts.

#. Notify team members of the upstream merge,
   especially if manual merges of :file:`MY_SRC/` files were required,
   so that they can manage merging changes into any untracked :file:`MY_SRC/` files they may have.


Local commits
=============

We are maintaining several local commits to files that do not fit in :file:`MY_SRC/` directories. They are:

#. Import changeset 7751 from upstream NEMO: `900e1ce4066f2a64223b502167a9a15a6d7c7b2d`_
#. Make :file:`rebuild_nemo` write compressed netCDF4 restart files: `28e2d9cd2a82b88e475a16804837eee22ea342f2`_
#. Sort cfg.txt in :file:`makenemo`, `9f0335b59c780d055b7466e5ffd641d4ab0234aa`_
#. Escape 'ls' in :file:`Fmake_WORK.sh`, `4979fc15317c1c899697c1b89d5a64d688917253`_

.. _900e1ce4066f2a64223b502167a9a15a6d7c7b2d: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/900e1ce4066f2a64223b502167a9a15a6d7c7b2d
.. _28e2d9cd2a82b88e475a16804837eee22ea342f2: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/28e2d9cd2a82b88e475a16804837eee22ea342f2
.. _9f0335b59c780d055b7466e5ffd641d4ab0234aa: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/9f0335b59c780d055b7466e5ffd641d4ab0234aa
.. _4979fc15317c1c899697c1b89d5a64d688917253: https://github.com/SalishSeaCast/NEMO-3.6-code/commits/4979fc15317c1c899697c1b89d5a64d688917253

Some of these are fixed in NEMO upstream:

#. Escape 'ls' in :file:`Fmake_WORK.sh`,
``https://forge.ipsl.fr/nemo/ticket/1895``,
``https://forge.ipsl.fr/nemo/changeset/8527``
